.. _gradient-boosted-eqs:

Gradient-boosted equivalent sources
===================================

As mentioned in :ref:`equivalent_sources`, one of the main drawbacks of the
equivalent sources technique is the high computational load required to
estimate source coefficients and ultimately to predict field values.
During the source coefficients estimation step (while running the
:meth:`harmonica.EquivalentSources.fit` method) a Jacobian matrix with a size
of number of sources times number of observation points must be built.
This Jacobian matrix could become too large to fit in memory if the number of
data points and sources are too big.

.. note::

   Interpolating 200000 data points using 200000 sources would require more
   than 300 GB only to store the Jacobian matrix (using 64 bits floats for each
   matrix element).

One way to reduce the memory requirement is using :ref:`block-averaged-eqs`,
but it might be not enough when working with very large datasets.

A solution to this problem is to use **gradient-boosted equivalent sources**,
introduced in [Soler2021]_.
This new methodology creates :math:`k` overlapping windows of equal size that
cover the entire survey area and defines one set of equivalent sources for each
windows, where each set is formed by the original equivalent sources that fall
inside its corresponding window.
The estimation of the coefficients is then carried out iteratively passing
through one window at a time. On each iteration the coefficients of the
selected subset of sources are fit against the observation points that fall
inside the same window. After each iteration the field generated by those
adjusted sources are predicted on every computation point and the *residue* is
updated.
The process finishes when every window has been visited.

The gradient-boosted equivalent sources have been included in Harmonica and can
be used through the :class:`harmonica.EquivalentSourcesGB` class.

Lets load some gravity data for Southern Africa:

.. jupyter-execute::

    import ensaio
    import pandas as pd

    fname = ensaio.fetch_southern_africa_gravity(version=1)
    data = pd.read_csv(fname)
    data

.. note::

   This gravity dataset is small enough to be interpolated with equivalent
   sources in any modest personal computer. Nevertheless, we will grid it using
   gradient-boosted equivalent sources to speed up the computations on this
   small example.

Compute gravity disturbance by subtracting normal gravity using :mod:`boule`
(see :ref:`gravity_disturbance` for more information):

.. jupyter-execute::

    import boule as bl

    normal_gravity = bl.WGS84.normal_gravity(data.latitude, data.height_sea_level_m)
    disturbance = data.gravity_mgal - normal_gravity

And project the data to plain coordinates using a Mercator projection:

.. jupyter-execute::

    import pyproj

    projection = pyproj.Proj(proj="merc", lat_ts=data.latitude.mean())
    easting, northing = projection(data.longitude.values, data.latitude.values)
    coordinates = (easting, northing, data.height_sea_level_m)

We can define some gradient-boosted equivalent sources through the
:class:`harmonica.EquivalentSourcesGB`. When doing so we need to specify the
size of the windows that will be used in the gradient boosting process.
We will use square windows of 100 km per side.
Moreover, gradient-boosted equivalent sources can be used together with
:ref:`block-averaged-eqs`. We will do so choosing a *block size* of 2 km
per side.


.. jupyter-execute::

    import harmonica as hm

    eqs = hm.EquivalentSourcesGB(
        depth=9e3, damping=10, block_size=2e3, window_size=100e3, random_state=42
    )

.. important::

    Smaller windows reduce the memory requirements for building the Jacobian
    matrix, but also reduces the accuracy of the interpolations. We recommend
    using the **maximum window size** that produces Jacobian matrices that can
    fit in memory.

.. note::

    The order in which windows are explored is randomized. By passing a value
    to ``random_state`` we ensure to obtain always the same result everytime we
    fit these equivalent sources.

We can use the :meth:`harmonica.EquivalentSourcesGB.estimate_required_memory`
method to find out how much memory we will need to store the Jacobian matrix
given the coordinates of the observation points. The value is given in bytes.

.. jupyter-execute::

    eqs.estimate_required_memory(coordinates)

Once we are sure that we have enough memory to store these Jacobian matrices we
can fit the sources against the gravity disturbance data:

.. jupyter-execute::

    eqs.fit(coordinates, disturbance)

And then predict the field on a regular grid of computation points:

.. jupyter-execute::

    import verde as vd
    region = vd.get_region(coordinates)
    grid_coords = vd.grid_coordinates(
        region=region,
        spacing=5e3,
        extra_coords=2.5e3,
    )
    grid = eqs.grid(grid_coords, data_names=["gravity_disturbance"])
    grid

Since this particular dataset doesn't have a good coverage of the entire area,
we might want to mask the output grid based on the distance to the closest data
point. We can do so through the :func:`verde.distance_mask` function.

.. jupyter-execute::

    grid_masked = vd.distance_mask(coordinates, maxdist=50e3, grid=grid)

And plot it:

.. jupyter-execute::

    import pygmt

    # Set figure properties
    w, e, s, n = region
    fig_height = 10
    fig_width = fig_height * (e - w) / (n - s)
    fig_ratio = (n - s) / (fig_height / 100)
    fig_proj = f"x1:{fig_ratio}"

    maxabs = vd.maxabs(disturbance, grid_masked.gravity_disturbance)

    fig = pygmt.Figure()

    # Make colormap of data
    pygmt.makecpt(cmap="polar+h0",series=(-maxabs, maxabs,))

    title = "Observed gravity disturbance data"
    with pygmt.config(FONT_TITLE="14p"):
        fig.plot(
            projection=fig_proj,
            region=region,
            frame=[f"WSne+t{title}", "xa500000+a15", "ya400000"],
            x=easting,
            y=northing,
            color=disturbance,
            style="c0.1c",
            cmap=True,
        )
    fig.colorbar(cmap=True, frame=["a50f25", "x+lmGal"])

    fig.shift_origin(xshift=fig_width + 1)

    title = "Gridded with gradient-boosted equivalent sources"
    with pygmt.config(FONT_TITLE="14p"):
        fig.grdimage(
            frame=[f"ESnw+t{title}", "xa500000+a15", "ya400000"],
            grid=grid.gravity_disturbance,
            cmap=True,
        )

    fig.colorbar(cmap=True, frame=["a50f25", "x+lmGal"])

    fig.show()


----

.. grid:: 2

    .. grid-item-card:: :jupyter-download-script:`Download Python script <gradient-boosted-eqs>`
        :text-align: center

    .. grid-item-card:: :jupyter-download-nb:`Download Jupyter notebook <gradient-boosted-eqs>`
        :text-align: center
