IGRF calculation
================

The International Geomagnetic Reference Field (IGRF) is time-variable spherical
harmonic model of the Earth's internal magnetic field [Alken2021]_ [IAGA2024]_.
The model is released every 5 years and allows us to calculate the internal
magnetic field from 1900 until 5 years after the latest release (based on
predictions of the secular variation). Harmonica allows calculating the 14th
generation IGRF field with :class:`harmonica.IGRF14`. Here's how it works.

.. jupyter-execute::

   import datetime
   import numpy as np
   import pygmt
   import boule as bl
   import harmonica as hm

All of the functionality is wrapped in the :class:`~harmonica.IGRF14` class.
When creating an instance of it, we need to provide the date on which we want
to calculate the field:

.. jupyter-execute::

   igrf = hm.IGRF14("1954-07-29")

The date can be provided as an `ISO 8601 formatted date
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_8601>`__ string like above or as a Python
:class:`datetime.datetime`:

.. jupyter-execute::

   igrf = hm.IGRF14(datetime.datetime(1954, 7, 29, hour=1, minute=20))

.. tip::

   If the time is omited, the default is midnight. If a timezone is omited, the
   default is UTC.

Calculating at given points
---------------------------

To calculate the IGRF field at a particular point or set of points, we can use
the :meth:`harmonica.IGRF14.predict` method. For example, let's calculate the
field on the date above at the `Universidade de SÃ£o Paulo
<https://www5.usp.br/>`__ campus. To do so, we need to provide the geodetic
coordinates longitude, latitude, and geometric height (in meters) of the
calculation point in that order:

.. jupyter-execute::

   field = igrf.predict((-46.73441817537987, -23.559276852800025, 700))
   print(field)

The return value ``field`` will always be a tuple with the eastward, northward,
and upward components of the magnetic field. The vector is in a geodetic
coordinate system with the horizontal (eastward and northward) directions
parallel to the surface of the ellipsoid and the upward direction parallel to
the ellipsoid normal at each given point.

We can print the results in a better way to view them:

.. jupyter-execute::

   print(" | ".join([f"B{c}={v:.1f} nT" for c, v in zip("enu", field)]))

Multiple values can be given as numpy arrays or lists:

.. jupyter-execute::

   field = igrf.predict((
       [-46.73441817537987, -157.81633280370718],
       [-23.559276852800025, 21.297542396621708],
       [700, 80],
   ))
   print(field)

The resulting components will be numpy arrays with a shape that matches the
shape of the coordinates.

Changing the reference ellipsoid
--------------------------------

The actual calculations (see the notes in :class:`harmonica.IGRF14`) are
performed in geocentric spherical coordinates. This means that the input
coordinates must be converted from a geodetic system (which is what most data
will come in) to a geocentric system and the output vector must be rotated back
to the geodetic system. We use the ellipsoids in :mod:`boule` to
handle these conversions. By default, we use the WGS84 ellipsoid but you can
pass other Boule ellipsoids (or make your own with :class:`boule.Ellipsoid`):

.. jupyter-execute::

   igrf_grs80 = hm.IGRF14("1954-07-29", ellipsoid=bl.GRS80)
   field = igrf_grs80.predict((-46.73441817537987, -23.559276852800025, 700))
   print(field)

Notice that the field values are slightly different. So it can be important
that the ellipsoid passed to the class is the one used for your coordinates.

Generating a grid
-----------------

If we want to make a grid of the IGRF values, we could create grid coordinates
and pass them to the :meth:`~harmonica.IGRF14.predict` method. However, there
are certain repeated operations that can be avoided when we know we're
calculating on a grid. Plus, it would be good to have the results in
a :class:`xarray.Dataset` that carried all of the associated metadata.

That's what the :meth:`harmonica.IGRF14.grid` method is for! Calculations with
it will be at least 2x faster than using :meth:`~harmonica.IGRF14.predict` and
it packages the results in a :class:`xarray.Dataset` full of metadata:

.. jupyter-execute::

   igrf = hm.IGRF14("2020-02-27")
   grid = igrf.grid(region=(0, 360, -90, 90), height=0)
   grid

We can plot the three components using :mod:`pygmt` on a nice map:

.. jupyter-execute::

   fig = pygmt.Figure()
   for c in ["b_east", "b_north", "b_up"]:
       fig.grdimage(
           grid[c], cmap="polar+h", projection="W15c", region="g",
       )
       fig.coast(shorelines=True)
       fig.colorbar(
           position="JMR+ml+o0.5c",
           frame=[
               "a10000",
               f"x+l{grid[c].attrs['long_name']}",
               f"y+l{grid[c].attrs['units']}",
           ]
       )
       if c == "b_east":
           fig.basemap(frame=["a", f"+t{grid.attrs['title']}"])
       else:
           fig.basemap(frame="a")
       fig.shift_origin(yshift="-h-0.5c")
   fig.show()

The grid spacing was calculated automatically to match the maximum degree of
the spherical harmonic expansion (default is 13). It can also be adjusted by
passing the ``spacing`` or ``shape`` arguments. For example, let's set the
spacing to 1 degree:

.. jupyter-execute::

   grid = igrf.grid(region=(0, 360, -90, 90), height=0, spacing=1)
   grid

We can also calculate the intensity (or amplitude) and the inclination and
declination angles from the vector using
:func:`harmonica.magnetic_vec_to_angles`. We'll add the resulting grids to our
:class:`xarray.Dataset` and add a little bit of metadata:

.. jupyter-execute::

   result = hm.magnetic_vec_to_angles(grid.b_east, grid.b_north, grid.b_up)
   grid["intensity"], grid["inclination"], grid["declination"] = result
   grid.intensity.attrs["long_name"] = "Intensity"
   grid.intensity.attrs["units"] = "nT"
   grid.inclination.attrs["long_name"] = "Inclination"
   grid.inclination.attrs["units"] = "degrees"
   grid.declination.attrs["long_name"] = "Declination"
   grid.declination.attrs["units"] = "degrees"
   grid

The angles will be in decimal degrees and the intensity in nT. We can plot them
with PyGMT the same way we did the vector components:

.. jupyter-execute::

   fig = pygmt.Figure()
   cmaps = {
       "intensity": "viridis",
       "inclination": "polar+h",
       "declination": "polar+h",
   }
   cb_annot = {
       "intensity": "a10000",
       "inclination": "a20+u\\260",
       "declination": "a40+u\\260",
   }
   for c in ["intensity", "inclination", "declination"]:
       fig.grdimage(
           grid[c], cmap=cmaps[c], projection="W0/15c",
       )
       fig.coast(shorelines=True)
       fig.colorbar(
           position="JMR+ml+o0.5c",
           frame=[
               cb_annot[c],
               f"x+l{grid[c].attrs['long_name']}",
               f"y+l{grid[c].attrs['units']}",
           ]
       )
       if c == "intensity":
           fig.basemap(frame=["a", f"+t{grid.attrs['title']}"])
       else:
           fig.basemap(frame="a")
       fig.shift_origin(yshift="-h-0.5c")
   fig.show()

We can clearly see the `South Atlantic Magnetic Anomaly
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/South_Atlantic_Anomaly>`__ in the intensity map!
